---
# Documentation: https://wowchemy.com/docs/managing-content/

title: "Flawed Measurements of Organised Crime Activities"
subtitle: "The Case of Extortion in Mexico"
summary: "Extortion against businesses is one of the main security challenges facing the Mexican government today. However, extortion measurements are flawed."
authors: ["prestevez"]
tags: ["Mexico", "extortion", "organised crime", "statistics", "victimisation"]
categories: ["Op-ed"]
date: 2018-04-05
lastmod: 2018-04-05
featured: false
draft: false

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder.
# Focal points: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight.
image:
  caption: ""
  focal_point: ""
  preview_only: false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this post with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["internal-project"]` references `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects: []

original_site: "The Informer"
original_site_url: "https://shoc.rusi.org/the-informer"
original_article_url: "https://shoc.rusi.org/informer/flawed-measurements-organised-crime-activities-case-extortion-mexico"

#Originally published in [The Informer](https://shoc.rusi.org/the-informer). Read [original article](https://shoc.rusi.org/informer/flawed-measurements-organised-crime-activities-case-extortion-mexico).
---


Extortion against businesses is one of the main security challenges
facing the Mexican government today. Statistics from crimes reported to
the police show that extortion has increased dramatically since the
country was plunged into a decade-long ‘war’ against organised crime,
rising by about [81% in the past 10
years](http://secretariadoejecutivo.gob.mx/docs/pdfs/cifras%20de%20homicidio%20doloso%20secuestro%20etc/HDSECEXTRV_122017.pdf).

However, given the risk of reprisals entailed by reporting extortion
incidents to the authorities, estimates from reported crimes rarely
provide reliable measurements of extortion incidence.

To mitigate this shortcoming, Mexico’s [national statistics agency
(INEGI)](http://www.inegi.org.mx) conducts regular victimisation surveys
that measure extortion, among other crimes. Estimates from surveys
conducted with [households
(ENVIPE)](http://www.inegi.org.mx/saladeprensa/boletines/2017/envipe/envipe2017_09.pdf)
and [businesses
(ENVE)](http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/contenidos/proyectos/encestablecimientos/especiales/enve/2016/doc/enve_2016_presentacion_ejecutiva.pdf),
suggest that extortion is, indeed, a widespread problem: it is the
second most common crime against households, and the third most common
crime against businesses. In the year of the latest available figures
(2016 for the household survey, and 2015 for the commercial survey),
there were an estimated 7.5 million incidents of extortion against
households (89 extortions per 1,000 people), and 650,000 incidents of
extortion against businesses (146 extortions per 1,000 businesses).

Extortion has important economic, political and social implications.
First, widespread extortion in the countryside has been linked to
dramatic [increases in the prices of food
staples](http://www.jornada.unam.mx/2013/07/20/opinion/017a2pol), while
extortion in general is often portrayed as a [generalised burden on the
economy](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-13120598) by imposing an
informal tax on many businesses.

Second, the [rise of the *fuerzas de autodefensa* (self-defence
forces)](http://www.jstor.org/stable/23526915) during the first year of
President Peña Nieto’s term shows how grave the political implications
of extortion can be. Faced with rampant extortion and violence inflicted
by organised crime, civilian groups in many rural areas of the country
set up armed paramilitary brigades to fight organised crime and expel
what they saw as ineffectual and corrupt local governments—though some
*autodefensas* eventually [turned
into](https://www.insightcrime.org/news/brief/mexico-vigilantes-protection-fees-echo-colombias-paramilitaries/)
extortive criminal groups themselves.

> In August 2011, a casino in Monterrey was set ablaze for refusing to
> acquiesce to extortion demands

Lastly, extortion has been linked to some of the deadliest incidents of
violence against Mexican society. In August 2011, a casino in
Monterrey—a city in northern Mexico—was [set
ablaze](http://articles.latimes.com/2011/aug/29/world/la-fg-mexico-casino-arrests-20110830)
for refusing to acquiesce to extortion demands. The incident, which
killed 52 patrons of the establishment, [left the country
reeling](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-14693074),
prompting then-President Calderón to [declare three days of national
mourning](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/26/52-die-arson-mexico-casino).

Such dramatic episodes, in conjunction with the dispiriting estimates of
extortion incidence produced by INEGI, have fuelled the belief that
extortion is inescapable. Based on academic work on extortion rackets,
such as Diego Gambetta’s [1993
study](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Sicilian-Mafia-Business-Private-Protection/dp/0674807421)
and [Letizia Paoli’s 2002
study](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/225889684_The_Paradoxes_of_Organized_Crime)
on the Italian mafia, scholars have suggested that Mexico’s [transition
to democracy and endemic
corruption](https://securitypraxis.eu/mexico-narcoviolence-mafia-2/)
generated power vacuums that have been exploited by the country’s
criminal groups—commonly known as ‘cartels’—prompting them to shift
their business models from trafficking drugs from Mexico to the US, into
[Mafia-style extortion
rackets](http://www.nbcnews.com/id/32437386/ns/world_news-americas/t/mexico-cartels-turning-full-scale-mafias/#.WnXv6iOcaRs).

This interpretation feeds into a narrative that paints Mexico as a
[failed
state](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/07/world/americas/mexico-state-corruption.html),
where organised crime violence has [purportedly
escalated](https://theconversation.com/a-report-says-that-mexico-is-the-second-deadliest-conflict-zone-in-the-world-its-just-not-true-77898)
beyond what is seen in war-torn countries. Such an approach leaves few
policy options to deal with extortion specifically, suggesting instead
policies to root out organised crime by slowly reclaiming the state’s
control of social and physical spheres ceded to the cartels by direct
confrontation, prosecution and by building effective institutions.

## The Two Flavours of Extortion

A distinction often missed when discussing the nature and implications
of the extortion phenomenon in Mexico is that it encompasses two
distinct crime types.

On the one hand, there is ‘telephone extortion’, which refers to
attempts to extract money (or other benefits) from victims through
threats made remotely via telephone calls. In general, victims are
cold-called by assailants who either offer a non-existent reward (a form
of advanced-fee scam), claim to have kidnapped a family member (‘virtual
kidnapping’), or claim to be a member of an organised crime group and
threaten to carry out severe punishments if victims do not comply with
stated demands. It is believed that most victims are selected randomly,
though some are targeted using information gleaned from data breaches,
social media, or from other unrelated telemarketing calls.

On the other hand, ‘in-person extortion’ refers to attempts to extract
money (or other benefits) by directly threatening the victim in person.
In these incidents, [assailants
threaten](http://www.inegi.org.mx/rde/2013/05/09/crime-against-the-private-sector-in-latin-america-existing-data-and-future-orientations-to-analyse-the-victimization-of-businesses/)
a business or household with damage, assault, death or other harms if
they refuse to pay a fee, and may also involve offers to protect the
victim from other criminal groups. When such in-person extortion
attempts happen regularly, the crime is called *cobro de piso*, which is
roughly translated as a ‘fee for the floor’ where businesses operate,
although this distinction is not consistently used.

> It is widely acknowledged that many telephone extortions originate
> from prisons, and that most victims face little danger if they ignore
> the threats

Whereas in-person extortion fits with the modus operandi of extortion
racketeering traditionally associated with the mafia and other organised
crime groups, telephone extortion is better described as a type of scam,
more akin to email spam than to extortion racketeering. Furthermore, it
is [widely
acknowledged](http://www.chron.com/news/nation-world/article/Mexico-extortion-racket-growing-from-behind-bars-1835082.php)
that many telephone extortions originate from prisons, and that most
victims face little danger if they ignore the threats. Preliminary
findings from my ongoing research support this notion, as the crimes
vary dramatically in terms of the harms and risks posed to victims. When
compared to telephone extortion incidents, in-person extortions are 8.5
times more likely to lead to victim acquiescence with extortionists’
demands, and 5.4 times more likely to involve reprisals for refusing to
acquiesce.

These distinctions strongly suggest that the crimes ought to be
considered as separate offence classes. Despite this, figures from
reported crime statistics and victimisation survey estimates routinely
report measurements that aggregate both telephone and in-person
extortions, misrepresenting the true nature and extent of the phenomena.
Specifically, lumping both crime types severely overestimates the
gravity of the extortion phenomenon, as telephone extortion is far more
common than in-person extortion (telephone extortions comprise around
94% of all extortion incidents against households, and 88% of extortions
against businesses). Thus, the widespread prevalence and incidence of
extortion does not accurately reflect the specific harms and risks of
extortion, by making the situation appear far worse than it actually is.

## The Upshot

This does not imply that telephone extortion is not a problem that needs
to be dealt with. The fact that many victims believe the mostly empty
threats behind telephone extortion is a symptom of an environment where
fear of crime is endemic. Yet, there is little evidence that telephone
extortions are linked to extortion rackets controlled by organised crime
groups. Telephone extortionists are not spatially bound to specific
territories, nor do they impose alternative governance structures. Thus
they cannot be directly interpreted as evidence of state failure.

> A flawed measurement of organised criminal activity can feed
> misleading narratives

Furthermore, the comparatively smaller prevalence and incidence of
in-person extortions suggest that the far graver problem of extortion
racketeering is not as widespread in Mexico and may instead be limited
to a small number of places, even after accounting for measurement
errors. Nonetheless, further research that looks at the phenomenon at
the local scale is needed to determine its nature and extent.

Of course, this does not mean that Mexico does not have an organised
crime problem, nor that democratic governance need not improve. However,
it does highlight how a flawed measurement of organised criminal
activity can feed misleading narratives. One of the most crucial aspects
of public policy formulation is defining the problem under scrutiny,
something especially relevant when dealing with organised crime—a
phenomenon that resists easy definitions. Thus, before any plausible
policy interventions to counter extortion in Mexico can be devised, it
is necessary to revise how the phenomenon itself is defined and
measured.

{{% republished %}}
